Plasma Youth Sports Games
with Unsuccess of the champion,
would like to thank Slaven Bilić
for stepping in as the host.
Bilić is one of the first sponsors,
ambassador and is our biggest promoter.
He used his life and sports experience
in order to prepare high-quality content
with his guests for all generations.
Thanks, Nane!
Luka, it's hard to announce you.
It's hard to say something smart
that you deserve
and at the same time be careful
not to overdo it.
However, according to a large
number of opinions, you are
the best football player
from this region.
You are the most decorated player
of the biggest club
in the world, Real Madrid,
and in several categories.
One of the best midfielders
in football history.
Despite all that, and it's no less
important, you are certainly
one of the most beloved players
of your generation.
Thank you for taking time for us.
-Thank you for the nice intro.
While I was listening to you,
it all seemed a bit unreal.
It's like I'm not aware of all that,
but it's nice to hear it.
That's the truth. I didn't want
to overdo the introduction,
but I think I've only said
the bare minimum about you.
It really is...
But we'll talk about that.
What I noticed is that you're
my sixth guest in a row
in these Champion's Failure specials.
My guests were all great people.
Of course, I had to prepare
the least for you because
we've known each other
our whole lives.
However, I noticed that you aren't
a frequent guest in the media.
In that regard, you behave
like Janica Kostelić.
You're not around much...
More precisely, not at all...
We have a lot of material
about you daily,
but it's mostly statements
after matches, quick press
comments, match previews.
I noticed you aren't a frequent guest
on shows like this. -You're right.
I never preferred big interviews.
Apart from the usual
statements after matches.
And sometimes before games,
press conferences and such.
Maybe I had one or two bigger
interviews, but for foreign media.
I never had one in Croatia.
Maybe because I have a hard time
gaining trust in people
and then it's hard for me
to speak openly with everyone.
Except for one written outlet
in Croatia and one journalist.
And I've been working with him
for many years
and I'm always ready
for an interview with him.
I mean Roberto Matteoni.
He also wrote the book about me.
-Of course.
And I haven't done an interview
with him for a year or more.
It's hard for me to gain trust
and talk openly with people.
Now that you're a journalist,
it's much easier for me.
Now you have to.
-It's easier for me.
I didn't have to, but it's easier.
-You're right. That's why you're special.
You were like that during
your football career too,
but we'll talk about that later.
So, we're currently in Milan,
and you've already settled in.
I'm not talking about football now,
but about things beyond it.
Have you started learning Italian?
-Yes. Thank God, I’ve managed well.
The city is beautiful. People
accepted me phenomenally.
In the club and outside it.
Teammates and coach. Fans too.
Everything is at a high level.
It's immediately clear that
AC Milan is a big club.
A historic club and one of
the biggest in the world.
You notice it at every step.
So I'm really happy and enjoying it.
I understand Italian quite well.
I still haven't started
learning it with a teacher.
Are Spanish and Italian
similar languages?
There are similarities, but
they're not really that close.
There are similar words,
but not exactly the same.
It's a big problem for me
when speaking because I still use
a lot of Spanish words. -But in the end,
everyone understands you.
Yes, everyone understands
what I want to say.
I remember when Zvonimir Boban
moved from AC Milan to Celta Vigo,
and when other players moved
from Italy to Spain, like Jarni,
the difference was much smaller
than when moving
from England or Germany to Italy.
At the very beginning you understand
a lot of words. -That's right.
I understand a lot when they speak
to me in Italian, especially the coach.
I understand everything well,
speaking is a bit harder.
But I think I'll solve that
very quickly too. -Excellent.
So Milan is now your new
destination after Madrid,
where you spent 13 years.
When an athlete plays 13 years,
we say it's a long career.
Few have such careers.
And you spent 13 years in Madrid.
I remember your farewell in Madrid,
it was emotional and magnificent.
You broke all the records,
but that must have
left some emptiness inside you.
How did you feel when you
left the club after many years?
Honestly, it wasn't easy for me.
I spent a little less than
half my life there.
In one club, in one city, and it was
one of the best periods of my life.
We can say that I came to Real
Madrid relatively late, at 27.
But at the right moment.
-You were ready.
I was ready for that step. Four years
in England helped me a lot.
And everything I experienced
and achieved in Madrid
really seems unreal to me.
If someone had told me
when I arrived in Madrid:
"You've come to the biggest club
in the world, in football history.
Write down what you want
to achieve and what you
would be satisfied with."
Not only would I not...
I would have been afraid to write
down everything I achieved.
So it's really something incredible.
I don't mean just trophies,
victories or anything else.
Even the fact that I spent
13 years in such a club.
I came at 27 and stayed
until almost 40.
That is something incredible.
We all know very well
what Real Madrid is.
It's known that there's no room
for average players.
To stay in such a club
and at that level
for so many years is the most
incredible thing for me.
Along with all the successes
I experienced there.
That is the greatest success.
-It's incredible to me.
When I first arrived, I thought
if I stayed five or six years,
that would be great. Because
careers usually last until 33 or 34.
Long ago, when I thought about it, I felt
if I played until 35, it would be great.
And I even exceeded that.
Thank God, I still play well.
So that's really incredible.
At one point, it seemed
you might even stay in Madrid.
It was my wish, I didn't say it
just to flatter the fans,
the club or anyone else.
It truly was my big wish
to end my career at Real.
But everything has
a beginning and an end.
Sometimes the things you want
don’t come true,
but regardless of the fact
my wish to retire
at Real Madrid didn't come true...
I achieved other things
I never thought I would.
What had to happen happened.
And I don't regret anything.
When I saw the farewell
they prepared for me...
Not even in my most wildest
dreams did I expect that.
Everything was perfect, very emotional.
Because I'm very emotional too,
although I don't show it.
I hide it and keep it to myself.
Those last days in Madrid
were very emotional for me.
That love from the fans, the club
and all the people connected
with Real Madrid is something
I’ll remember forever.
It's truly incredible.
There are no words to thank
the fans and the club for such
treatment throughout 13 years.
They treated me that way
from the first day.
It didn't start after, say,
"La Decima" or after
the second Champions League.
From the beginning when I came
to Real Madrid, no matter how...
And the difficulties I had.
-And the difficulties you had.
I felt that love from the fans,
they felt that I was the one.
And that gave me motivation
and inspiration to give back
in the best way.
-It was like that everywhere.
You are one of those people who leave
no option but to love him.
It left a void for us too.
For example, everyone who loves
football follows Real Madrid
and everyone who plays there.
Because Real Madrid is Real Madrid.
I followed Real Madrid much
more closely for 13 years.
Which players they signed?
And which FC Barcelona
or Atlético signed.
How many points ahead
Real Madrid was.
You develop a bond with Real Madrid
that goes beyond reason and then,
suddenly it’s over. Yet you find
yourself following Real Madrid again,
because it’s Real Madrid. That void
has to exist, it’s inevitable.
But as an old Chinese proverb says,
"From the top of the mountain,
every path leads downhill."
So yes, after Real Madrid,
everything can only go downward.
However, when the opportunity
with Milan appeared,
it felt like a natural fit,
almost as if that was it,
because of the stature of the club and
Milan belonging to that small circle
of clubs that stand shoulder to shoulder
with, or just beneath, Real Madrid,
regardless of their current form.
Would you say it’s that kind of a club?
Absolutely. I completely agree with you.
I’ve always said that after Real Madrid,
wherever you go, it’s a step down,
there’s no question about it.
Every player who’s been there
will tell you the same. But I truly
believe I joined a club whose prestige
and history place is
very close to Madrid,
and for me, it was the most ideal
situation imaginable.
Especially because I’ve loved
Milan since childhood.
I grew up watching Italian football.
Milan was always my team,
my favourite club.
Because of Zvone, or the whole picture?
-It was because of Milan in general,
but of course, Zvone
was there at the time.
He had a tremendous career with Milan,
captained the Croatian national team,
and naturally, his presence made many
Croatians, maybe not all, but most,
support Milan just as they later
supported Real Madrid when I was there.
So, when the Milan option
came up, it felt like fate.
Because it meant
staying at the top level.
Italian league, in my opinion,
is a highly competitive league,
one of the toughest in Europe,
where many teams are evenly matched
and every game is a battle. It was,
frankly, an easy decision for me.
What also sealed it was the way
the club approached me,
the people, their openness,
the way they explained the project.
Everything about it made me feel, yes,
this is it. -And it was a perfect match.
As much as Milan suited you, they were
equally desperate for a player who could
bring that spark, someone with
charisma, ambition, and drive,
which you naturally radiate.
-I agree completely.
And if I may add, whenever
I used to think hypothetically,
while I was still at Real Madrid, about
the day I might not be there anymore,
the first club that always came to mind
was Milan. It was instinctive.
Whenever I imagined that next chapter,
the answer was always the same: Milan.
When you were young, actually,
when you were still a child,
because you’re still young now, Serie A,
at the end of the 1990s, was the league.
The Premier League hadn’t yet
reached today’s level
and back then, Serie A was
the creme de la creme, as they say.
And your idols came from there.
In a way, Serie A raised you.
One of your idols, if I’m not mistaken,
was Totti, right?
Yes, Totti was one of my idols.
-Why him?
I loved the way he played,
the charisma, the personality,
everything I admire in football.
The creativity, the intelligence,
the technique. He had it all, and he
embodied everything good about the game.
That’s why he was one of the players
I adored as a kid,
along with Zvone later on...
And of course, Zidane and Ronaldo,
who, to me, was phenomenal, one of my
favourite footballers of all time.
I wouldn’t say he was an idol per se,
but as a player,
he’s one of my all-time favourites.
And back then, everyone played in Italy,
right? -Yes. He also played in Italy.
He played for Barcelona and Real Madrid,
of course... -But Inter was the thing.
Exactly. Inter was where
it all happened, until his injury.
Great. Now, when you compare leagues,
Primera, the Premier League,
and Serie A today? -They’re all
different, quite different.
It’s always tricky to compare, but in my
opinion, what I see in Italy is
a league heavily built around
technical and tactical discipline.
Especially tactical. Teams are so well-
organized, it’s hard to break them down,
hard to create chances.
It’s a demanding type of football
because against any team, you have to
work to earn an opportunity and win.
That’s what sets it apart
from Spain and England.
In Spain, the focus is
also on a more technical play,
in England, it’s that classic
"end-to-end" football,
fast, physical, running gun football,
non-stop action, intensity everywhere.
And the spectacle is what they want.
In Spain, if you’re Real Madrid
and you’re not attacking,
even if you’re leading 2-0,
the fans start whistling, right?
-True. That expectation is constant.
Here in Italy, a more pragmatic
approach is tolerated,
maybe not pure "parking the bus,"
but definitely a more calculated style.
Exactly. There’s a much stronger
tactical focus. In Spain, of course,
there’s plenty of transition play
and fast football, as you say,
especially with Real Madrid during my 13
years there, people were never satisfied
with just the result. Winning 2-0
wasn’t enough if you weren’t attacking,
if you were defending yourself.
They demanded a spectacle.
Right, and that’s what
makes it Real Madrid.
But anyway, the whole idea
of this show, as you know,
is to talk not only about your career
but also to show younger generations,
whether they’re athletes or not,
that success stories like yours
don’t just happen by chance.
They’re not built on ease or perfection,
as we say in Dalmatia, "po špagu"
as if everything went smoothly.
They’re built on challenges,
not necessarily failures,
but moments where you have to
fight hard, again and again,
through thorns to reach the stars,
as the saying goes.
So, to really tell that story properly,
we have to go back to the beginning,
to your childhood. You were born
in September of 1985, right? -Yes.
And in your excellent book,
which you co-wrote with Robert Matteoni,
you describe your childhood
in great detail.
You remember it vividly,
you talk about your grandfather,
your upbringing in Zaton Obrovački,
and all those early memories.
Yes, it wasn’t an easy childhood,
but when I look back on it,
I can’t say it was an unhappy one.
Quite the opposite, actually.
I was a happy kid. I enjoyed life.
Despite the war,
despite the hardships of that time,
I remember my childhood as a joyful one.
because I was surrounded by friends.
There were so many of us, because we
were living in a hotel as refugees.
And all those things
that were happening around us,
in some way, we were
aware of them, but still...
You were a child, and life was good.
-Exactly. You had your friends,
you went outside,
played football all day long,
did all the things kids do,
hide and seek, games, laughter.
Of course, you had great time
then... -We had a nice time.
Do you remember
the time before the war?
Is that still vivid,
or is it more like a blur now?
Some things I don’t remember clearly.
We were living in Zaton near Obrovac,
and when the war started,
we moved to Zadar, where we lived in
a hotel. I do remember certain moments,
I remember when my grandfather was
killed, I remember scenes like that.
Of course, those are things that leave
a mark, and you can’t forget them.
But again, despite everything,
despite the pain and hardship,
my childhood was happy. -Of course,
it’s beautiful that you can say that.
Was football there
from the very beginning?
Or was it more just sport in general
basketball, maybe, or something else,
and then later football was the star?
-Football was there from the start.
I love other sports too,
I play basketball and I think
I’m pretty decent at it.
I enjoy tennis and other sports too.
I’ve always been a sports-minded person.
But football was the one.
That part in the book
is written beautifully.
It says that your father, Stipe, once
said how he never got the chance himself
but that you, his son, will get
the chance, whatever it takes.
In terms of support, in terms of
sacrifices, even buying you those
shin guards like Ronaldo’s,
and all the rest...
Did you, as a kid,
ever feel that pressure?
That sense that your success might one
day determine your family’s success too?
Honestly, no.
I didn’t feel pressure back then.
Mainly because my parents
never put any pressure on me.
They simply wanted their child, or their
children, to do what they loved,
to enjoy it, and to be happy. They
wanted to give us everything they could,
and even more if it meant that I might
have a chance to succeed one day.
They never imagined it would all turn
into this, what it is today. -Of course.
But they wanted to be supportive in
everything I was passionate about
and for me, that was football. Around
that time, when the war was ending
and people started returning
to their towns and villages,
rebuilding their homes,
we faced the same decision.
It was either go back
to our village or stay in Zadar.
Everyone kept telling my father,
"Why stay there? Go back home,
there’s nothing for you in the city.
Forget football." But my parents
made a different decision. We stayed.
We stayed in the hotel. And, as I said
before, they sacrificed everything,
absolutely everything, so that
I could keep doing what I loved.
They deserve the most credit,
especially in those early days.
All my life, but especially then,
because they could have said "we're done."
Who knows which path I'd take
and how things would develop after.
So yes... If I felt pressure,
I didn't feel anything. -Yes.
I enjoyed what I was doing.
Playing football made me happy.
I had my dreams. I thought
that one day I would become
a successful footballer, that I'd
be successful in what I do.
But if I had pressure or thought
I must do something,
no, I didn't have that. But I wanted
to somehow give back
to my parents, and I was fully
focused. I wanted to do everything
to reach what I wanted. -That's
important. It shaped your character.
My grandma used to say: what you
learn by third grade is what you know.
That's it. Your situation...
then not in Zadar, but later
in Dinamo, as a junior or cadet...
You're the oldest child, right?
You have two sisters, the only son.
And Janica said she never felt
as a child that they lacked money
or lived without wealth.
Whether you like it or not, that
builds character and responsibility.
I won't say an obligation. Parents
do it out of love, of course,
but because of that love, you want
to give back and do something
for all of you, in the end.
-Yes, that's true.
I wanted to give the maximum I could,
to repay my parents for the support
and their sacrifice.
That was my guiding thought.
There was no pressure
that I must succeed.
You know those guys.
I've seen it a hundred times.
Dudu and Ćorluka are very similar.
When you three arrived
to our U-21 team,
it was almost a copy-paste.
Except of course for Dudu,
there's no war in Brazil,
but he has a big family.
He's the only one who at 15,
you know this better,
came to Zagreb.
Ćarli’s family from Derventa
overnight, a huge family, five boys.
Whether you like it or not, you
carry that responsibility inside,
that the future is on you. Not just
yours, but your whole family’s.
It's easy to break there.
But if you succeed, it's the world.
Then you're Rocky. -I agree.
I wanted them to be proud of me.
To be proud of their child,
that they raised him right,
that he did what they maybe
expected from him,
because they believed in him.
That mattered to me. For my parents
to be proud and happy.
I also have my children, and I know
that when they do something good,
there’s no greater joy. -Yes.
No greater wealth.
That was my motivation.
As we say here, conditions
weren’t ideal or easy.
Not the best conditions. For example,
you in Zadar, as you said,
you had a ball. -We had.
-You had a kit. One pair of shin guards.
Those as Ronaldo. You had them.
To the pitch you had to walk or bike.
You have all that, but not too much.
For anything else you can’t lie back,
you have to earn it. -Yes.
-You have to bite, right?
That’s common. Croatian athletes
respond best when conditions are tough.
I’ve seen it a million times.
Even before matches.
When everything is good,
top hotel, top everything…
Suddenly it drops. When something
keeps you on edge... -Stress, nerves.
You function better
than when everything is relaxed.
It’s remarkable. -It is.
So, you're in Zadar. Then comes
a moment I'd like to clarify. Hajduk.
That's Zadar’s region. People there
supported Zadar, of course.
But it's Hajduk. Most people
support Hajduk.
You were invited to a Hajduk
tournament or something. -Yes.
Then you get… Hajduk don’t take you,
you must return to Zadar.
Then the coach in Zadar puts you
"on ice", as punishment.
How was that?
Do you remember?
Well, first of all, in Dalmatia
almost everyone supports Hajduk.
I did too, especially my dad.
The chance opened to go
to Hajduk for training camp.
To go to Hajduk, stay with them,
start playing for Hajduk.
That chance opened,
and my dad did it without telling
the late Tomislav Bašić.
I went with my current best man,
Oštrić, we were there together.
We stayed maybe two weeks.
We had some matches,
trainings and all that.
People at Hajduk decided then
that it was too early for me.
For whatever reason… -Grgurević
was already there? -He was.
When I was there, I felt I was
on that level, that...
That you belonged there. -That I
could see I was the one. We played
many matches, Zadar vs Hajduk,
Šibenik. We mostly won.
We beat Hajduk, Šibenik,
and other Croatian clubs.
We had a good generation.
I felt it was right.
But Hajduk decided
it was still too early.
Maybe due to pressure
from Zadar, because then
the late Tomislav Bašić had
big influence in football.
He was avant-garde,
ahead of his time.
He got angry about it.
At my dad, mainly,
because he took me
without telling him.
OK, what happened happened.
I didn’t pass, I returned to Zadar.
Of course there was disappointment.
You must return to Zadar. That
disappointment of "you’re not that good".
Not good enough,
now you return to us.
I expected that when I returned
I'd continue training.
We move on, as if nothing happened.
It didn’t discourage me,
but it did touch the ego…
-It cut you down. -Yes.
But the late Tomo Bašić told
my dad no. If he's not good enough
for Hajduk, he's not good enough
for us. And he can’t train.
Then my dad asked why, how.
No, he can't train for three months.
Let him work... Back then he had
special exercises. Let him hang
on the fence to stretch out,
so he could grow. Did it help?
I don’t know. Those three months
I couldn’t train. Imagine that.
I love football, it’s everything,
and you can’t go train with friends.
But I used that time to do
what he told me to do.
I played every day on the parking
lot in front of the hotel, at school.
That’s how I compensated for
not being allowed to train.
My dad went completely crazy.
They had a great relationship,
but he got a bit upset. You’re
forbidding his child to train. -Yes.
Maybe he thought he was ruining me
or stopping my career.
But after 2-3 months they talked
and sorted everything out.
I went back to training in Zadar.
After that I went to Dinamo.
That’s the reason I didn’t stay
in Hajduk. The exact reason,
as I said before, I don't know.
They simply decided
it was too early for me,
that I wasn’t ready yet.
Then that story appeared again,
the same one as today,
more or less. I don’t know
what it was then,
but it followed you.
Later you carried that stigma
for quite some time, as if you
weren’t physically strong enough,
that you weren’t it. Did that,
not now, but back then,
do you remember, you said it
didn’t shake you. Did it maybe...
That can shake you on that path
when someone tells you that.
Or were you uncompromising,
believing it was irrelevant.
No, it didn’t shake me at all,
didn’t plant any doubt in me
that maybe it was true. I really
always had great faith in myself.
It followed me not only in those
younger years, but also when
I came to Dinamo, when I left
for England. -Yes. -And later
even in Real. Through my whole
career. It followed me
until I won the Ballon d’Or.
Then they said, maybe that’s it.
I’m exaggerating a bit,
but that’s how it was.
It was only motivation for me
to continue. As a person
through those younger periods
and later, as I grew and got older,
I didn’t care about others’ opinions.
-Nothing? -OK, you listen,
you hear, but it motivated me.
Especially negative opinions.
I always held on to the positive
ones, because there were such.
You can’t say everything
was negative.
But it never... If I had cared
about others’ opinions,
especially such judgments,
because my opinion of myself
wasn’t like that. Another thing
would be if I also thought
that I was short or weak.
My opinion was the opposite.
Football isn’t just strength
and height. Football is much
more than strength alone, that
you must be 1.90 meters tall,
that you must run 100 meters
in 11 or 12 seconds.
No, football is much more.
Technique, mind… -Feeling. -Feeling.
Much more of everything else.
And today when I watch football,
again people try to push that
aggression, speed, strength.
Today everything is measured.
-Everything is measured, but it’s not.
But no, in football,
the mind is the most important.
And it always will be. Strength
and speed will never replace
technique and intelligence,
because that’s what people
truly love about football.
Because of those things.
Well said, Luka.
You mentioned Tomislav Bašić
several times as your football father,
and you mentioned him again now,
but unfortunately he passed away.
You also went to his funeral.
At that age, the role of a coach
is much greater. You listen
to him more than your parents
in those adolescent years?
Was he a special person?
-He was special, truly special.
As I said earlier,
he was ahead of his time.
He understood football
on a very high level.
And for me, he was special
because he was one
of the rare people who believed
in me from the very beginning.
When others were saying the things
you mentioned earlier... -Yes.
He was by my side from the start.
He believed in me,
and he always told me where
I would go and what I would achieve.
He was always there for me,
even when others didn’t believe in me
and were skeptical. He never was.
Right from the start.
He was one of the few people,
besides my family,
and among coaches he was truly
one of the rare ones.
I don’t want to be unfair and
say there were no others,
but with him I had a special bond.
My football father and I were
close even outside football.
His son was also my coach
in the younger categories,
so that connection was really
something incredible,
and the gratitude I feel for him
can’t be expressed in words.
So yes, it was truly
something unbelievable.
So he was the link to Dinamo,
and that’s how you went there.
And the separation from your mom
and sisters was emotional,
wasn’t it, when you had to
leave for Zagreb? -Yes.
He recommended me to Dinamo
and to Zdravko, who at that
time was the number one
person in the club.
He recommended me,
and Zdravko didn’t even know me.
None of them knew much about me.
They took him at his word.
Yes, Zdravko trusted him.
-Yes, he did. That’s how it was.
And leaving my family
was difficult, honestly.
My sisters, my mom, my dad…
Leaving Zadar for Zagreb.
Back then, without highways,
it was almost a five-hour drive.
A long trip. And even though
the ride passed quickly,
the goodbye was not easy.
Everyone cried - my sisters,
my dad, who is very emotional
and can’t hold it in.
He let everything out.
My mom was the most composed,
even though she’s emotional too,
but she’s more like me,
she keeps it inside.
But when I got into the car, because
I didn’t want to cry in front of them,
the tears started coming
for me too.
Because you're leaving behind
your friends, childhood,
and you're going to a new city
where you have to meet new friends,
but I knew where I was going
and I wanted to progress.
You were ready for that step.
-I was ready.
It wasn't easy, but when you
know what you want,
everything becomes much easier.
-You arrive in Zagreb, a big city,
Dinamo a top club at that time.
At the academy run by Zdravko,
everything was perfectly organized.
You develop normally, right?
You adapt to everything,
and then comes that period
which is, how should I put it,
not really exciting and it kind of
goes under the radar, I'd say.
But that's actually the most
important period, when your
youth career ends, and so many
players get lost there,
because it's the hardest
transition... -Yes.
... the transition from youth
to senior football, and for you,
everything was basically going fine.
The move to Zrinjski,
from today's perspective,
sounds like one of the best
decisions. -Yes.
But at the time, it was a huge risk.
It was a ticking time bomb,
because you were going
to another country,
to a league that is tough
and unforgiving, right?
How did you feel back then?
-It just happened that way.
As you said yourself, that move
from juniors to seniors
is complicated, and a lot of players
get lost there. In my opinion,
that happens because in
that period they don't play,
they stay where it's easier,
where they're in their comfort zone,
and then they're not ready
to take that step,
to maybe even go one level down,
so they can eventually rise back up.
And in my opinion, that might be
part of the problem.
But when that opportunity appeared,
I immediately wanted
to go to Zrinjski. I knew I was going
to a professional league,
and I thought that was better for me,
because I would be competing
in senior football, and I wouldn't
remain among the juniors.
At that time, Dinamo were forming
their second team, but they
would have played against second-
division and third-division sides...
You'd be with your friends,
it would be nice, comfortable,
in your comfort zone...
But would you really improve?
That's the real question.
-And was going to Zrinjski your decision?
No, a few players had already
gone to Zrinjski,
and then they asked if I would
come too. I said I would,
because Landeka and Đidić had gone,
and I had a very good relationship
with both of them.
The club director at that time
was Đidić’s father, so they also
asked me if I would come.
I agreed, and I went down there,
and the rest, as they say, is history.
And things were fantastic for me there.
It was one of the best decisions
I made, even though from
today’s perspective it might
seem a bit risky.
But I didn’t see it that way.
I saw it as an opportunity
to prove myself. -I understand.
That’s how I approached it,
and it turned out to be phenomenal.
It helped you that, very soon,
Štef Deverić came in as coach,
and he had been your coach
in the youth team. -Yes.
He came very quickly, maybe after
five or six rounds. -Yes.
Although even with the previous coach,
Franjo Đidić, we worked very well.
I felt good there from the first day.
I remember the situation
when I came to Zrinjski
and the first match was approaching.
You know how it used to be, after training,
and before the match the next day,
they'd give you the list of players
who would play, those included
in the squad. The first eighteen.
Now, whether you would play
or not wasn’t the point,
but I had gone there to play.
So everyone is reading the names,
and I’m not on the list.
And no one says anything to me.
When training finished,
I went to the showers
and the tears started.
I was disappointed, because
I thought I had come there to play,
and the coach didn’t
even put me on the list.
Under the shower, alone,
I’m crying and praying to God
that no one walks in and sees me.
Then somehow I calmed down,
got dressed, got ready,
and went home
completely disappointed.
Then they called me and said:
"You're not on the list
because your documents
didn’t arrive in time."
That was a huge relief.
Okay, so it’s not bad after all.
That’s one of the anecdotes. After that,
everything started going great.
Stjepan Deverić arrived,
and we had a really good season.
At first, we were fighting
to stay up, but in the end
we finished somewhere
mid-table, maybe 7th or 8th.
But that period in Mostar
shaped me as a person,
it toughened me a lot, because
the league was, as I’ve said
a hundred times, ruthless,
with very aggressive opponents.
That helped me as
a young player... -Yes, yes.
... to grow and to see that I
could handle senior football.
Those were intense years.
We talked about that - that’s the
period when many players get lost,
but you, after a year in Zrinjski,
went to Inter Zaprešić.
And again, luck was waiting
for you there,
luck that you had no control over.
Because you didn’t know that
Štef Deverić would come in
as the coach, and yet things
turned out that way.
You arrive at Inter, where
Čeči Bogdan is also a very
pleasant man, a gentleman,
articulate, loves to talk...
Phenomenal. -Supportive
of young players…
And suddenly, you’re fighting
for the title... -Yes. -Right?
After only six months there.
At the same time, Aljoša and I
arrive in the U-21 national team,
people who don’t follow
the old rule that in the youth
national team only players
who are exactly 21 must play,
but that someone who is 18
can also play.
We recognized a few of you
and called you up.
After that, your return
to Dinamo followed,
after six months, at a moment
when Dinamo were
"worse than ever -
the league of fools."
Yes. -You returned, but not
"quietly through the back door",
you were given the keys
to make a difference.
That’s three dressing rooms
in two years, that’s difficult.
All of that happened
in a year and a half.
Yes, but I have to say that,
as we mentioned earlier,
I was one of the few from
the ’85 and ’84 generations
who didn’t get an early
chance at Dinamo.
I didn’t go even once to preseason
with Dinamo’s first team,
while there were players who did,
and we were the same age.
How could you go, when you
left for Zrinjski at 18?
Well, yes, but if you believe I’m the one,
maybe you can take me along,
and then see whether I could impose
myself and whether I have the quality.
But that trust wasn’t there.
I went to Zrinjski.
I played a phenomenal season
there and came back,
but again I didn't go to training,
for example, with Dinamo,
but I went on loan to Inter.
That wasn't bad for me.
On the contrary, that helped me.
I wanted that.
I didn't refuse it and say
I didn't want to go to training.
You didn't feel like
a generational talent? -I did.
Yes, but you weren't recognized
by them? -I wasn't treated that way.
The players who got the chance
all went to training.
Maybe not all of them,
not to mention names.
But I don't have
a bad opinion about it.
Because you knew you were better
than those who went to training?
That was my thinking.
The late Tomo Bašić
didn’t want me to leave.
He said I should go
straight to Dinamo.
He kept saying I was "the one",
but that's irrelevant.
The experience in Zrinjski
built me up as a player,
it helped me a lot. Going to Inter
created a phenomenal team.
Čarli went with me,
Čale and Janjetović.
There were a few of us from Dinamo.
An incredible squad was created.
In the first six rounds we had six wins.
We even beat Dinamo in Zaprešić.
And everything went well until
mid-season, we were even first.
Yes, we were first and Dinamo
decided to bring me back
in that winter transfer window.
I wanted to stay at Inter at that time.
I wanted to stay, because
we were playing well.
We were fighting
for the championship.
I returned to Dinamo for half a season.
I never liked returning halfway through.
You either start from
the beginning or you don't.
But Dinamo decided
to bring me back.
It was probably influenced
by Niko’s move to Hajduk.
And then my worst half-season
at Dinamo happened,
where we were playing
in a meaningless league.
I played one or two games
and then got injured.
That is the only period when
I was glad to be injured.
Because there was chaos in the club.
When you look at it from perspective,
when all that is over,
then everything is great.
However, as you said, the third locker
room in a year and a half is Dinamo,
where Niko Kranjčar goes from Dinamo.
He was actually kicked out of Dinamo. -Yes.
A top player, a legend,
the greatest talent leaves.
And then you come along...
People had nothing against you,
of course, but they had against Niko.
That's a lot of pressure for you.
Yes, it was a burden, even though
there was chaos in the club.
And in the team, among the players,
there was a bad atmosphere.
I don't want to remember
that six-month period.
Did you deliberately put him aside?
-Yes. But it was the way it was.
Every experience strengthens you
somehow. You toughen up...
When it passes.
So in that six-month period,
I learned something.
You see that everything is not ideal
like it was in Zrinjski.
Or like it was in those
six months at Inter.
You came into a situation where
you see... -That's not really the case.
You practically don't know
who drinks and who pays.
That was how it was
for six months.
And when I came back after the injury,
it was already the end,
everything had been in vain.
Then I came back and played
two matches and the season ended.
That was with Niko Kranjčar.
They actually...
The journalists created this story about
the rivalry between Niko and you.
As a coach, I noticed
that you two are artists,
two creative people, geniuses,
who are best together on the field,
when you are close to each other.
And that's how we are
in the national team.
Niko plays on the left, and you
keep it on the left side...
And on the right side, Srna
and Ćorluka go on the attack.
Later, you played together
in Tottenham.
Two talented artists, two friends
who respect each other
and work best together on the field,
because they understand each other.
Yes, definitely. This was shown through
our matches in the national team,
and later through Tottenham,
that we worked phenomenally
together on the field.
Off the field we had great
respect for each other.
It was a pleasure to play with Niko,
because he is a great player.
It is a pleasure to play with players
who see football in a similar way. -Yes.
So that was the period until we played
together in the national team
and at Tottenham, especially in the
national team, where a phenomenal
climate and generation created itself,
and you contributed a lot to it.
Maybe we lacked a bit of sporting luck
to make a big result with you,
but later everything
came to be repaid.
With Niko, creating a rivalry is normal,
especially when he was in Hajduk,
and I was in Dinamo, but I never felt
that rivalry in that way.
I respected him as a player
and as a person.
And it was a pleasure
to compete against him.
That was the way I looked
at our relationship.
During that period
when you grow up,
in Zagreb, you meet your wife Vanja,
the woman of your life.
I am lucky to know your family.
It is a unique family.
They are your Pentagon.
Whenever someone asks me
about Luka Modrić,
how normal he is,
my answer is the same.
"Go and spend 5 minutes with
his family, with his mom and dad,
and everything will be clear.
I don't have to explain anything."
Parents often go crazy. Stipe
remained Stipe, he hasn't changed.
Your mom was still
your mom, of course,
and your sisters and your uncle.
They are your Pentagon, your pick,
your base where you keep balance
in this crazy world, to stay normal
and phenomenal.
Those are the foundations,
there are no flaws at all. -That's
definitely the case, in every way.
There are dad, mom, sisters and
an uncle who is like a father to me.
They raised me to be like this.
When you see them,
I can't be any different.
And I haven't changed at all.
I don't think I'm anything special
because of what I've achieved.
I'll continue to be a normal boy
who has his good and bad days.
As a person, I progressed,
changed, but I didn't change the original
that makes me who I am.
-You mature. -Yes, I mature.
But sometimes people
don't like something
that I do and say
that I've changed.
But that's not the case.
They gave me peace and stability.
I met Vanja while playing at Inter
and she gave me great stability.
While she's at home, I can focus
on the field, on what's primary.
That's not the case in today's world,
to have someone like that by your side.
For someone to subordinate themselves
to you and your career as she did.
As you said, she's my jackpot.
-Yes, jackpot.
During that period,
you are doing really well.
After Dinamo Zagreb fights
for the "league for fools",
Josip Kuže returns to Dinamo Zagreb.
Then you become champions
and it begins dominance
and lasts all that time.
Unfortunately, it still is.
In principle, it was like that.
At that time, you also played
for the youth national team,
which achieved good results.
Then you earned a call up
for the senior national team
for the match against Argentina.
In 2006 you also went to the World Cup.
You haven't played much,
but you still played.
As I came to the national team,
you start playing for the senior team
and immediately become
one of the main players.
The national team played well,
your games were great.
We qualified for Euro,
and that was your first competition
where you played the main role.
The beginning was triumphant, when you
score a penalty in the third minute.
It's a big responsibility when you have
to take a penalty in the third minute.
And the night before that match,
you and I had a conversation at Prater.
Then we experienced that
disappointment against the Turkey.
Even now, when we talk sometimes,
you still think about that match.
I will never... Regardless of all
the other results that we later achieved
and played in the League of Nations final.
That match can't be easily forgotten.
It is one of the toughest...
Not one for me, but it was the toughest
moment of my football career.
You were still young at the time.
-I was young, but regardless...
I wasn't ready, but the
game was really tough.
It was hard to accept why it all
ended the way it did. How?
What could we have done better?
Later, we thought a lot about
whether everything could
have happened differently.
If I did this, or if he did that.
For the next few months
I was unable to function normally.
Even when I moved to England
I was still thinkinh about that.
It was not easy for us.
You too can recall the situation
in the locker room after the match
against the Turkish national team.
-Yes. -What was happening there.
Such an atmosphere isn't usual
even at a funeral,
like the one in our locker room.
We probably had to lose in order
to win later. -Yes, I agree.
At that moment,
we couldn't understand it.
At that moment, we didn't
think about it, and even some
people came into the locker room
to tell us that everything would be fine.
We just looked at him and wondered,
what do you mean. Leave me alone.
Everyone leave because I want to disappear.
However, that made us stronger.
Without those failures,
I might not know
how to appreciate the successes
we achieved later.
It's something that's necessary,
no matter how much you don't want it.
But you need it in order
to learn something from it.
To come out stronger and be able
to rejoice more later. -Capitalize it.
Yes and capitalize.
In those qualifications you played
for a year and a half, and of course
for Dinamo Zagreb when you played
the qualifiers for the Champions League.
There you have experienced
some disappointments,
I mean the game against Werder Bremen.
But you also had great victories.
However, in these qualifiers against
England, against Russia,
Israel and other national teams,
you simply came...
I know this because
I follow that every day.
You played well before too, but then you
became mature and aware of your quality.
Yes, that was all... what I always
thought about myself.
I proved myself by playing in the most
difficult matches with Dinamo
in the Champions League,
and also in the domestic league
matches against Hajduk.
Against England, against Russia.
In such matches,
you can see who is who.
Then the quality of the player is confirmed
and whether he can play at that level.
There was also that match against
Germany. One of the better matches.
I remember, and you probably
remember too,
when we went to play at Wembley
after the match against Macedonia.
Then I told you that we would crush them.
-No, that was in Čatež.
At that time the Croatina national
team was preparing in Čatež.
Yes, we were in Čatež. -After
we qualified following Macedonia,
we arrived in Čatež. On Wednesday,
there was a match at Wembley,
which technically didn't mean much to
us, but it does because it's Wembley.
To them, it meant everything
because they're English.
We were training on Monday,
it was muddy in Čatež
because we had been
training there for eight days...
We had already been playing in the mud.
-It was November...
And you said to me,
all muddy from the pitch:
"Can you imagine when we go out on
Wembley on Wednesday..."
... how we'll destroy them...
And it really was like that. -Yes, yes.
I'm not saying this now just
because I'm talking to you,
but you, gave us,
younger players the confidence.
We were so grateful to you,
and we wanted to return that.
My feeling was that, when we played
poorly, we had let you down.
We wanted to repay you for everything
you gave us, not just as a coach,
but with your advice as well.
I still remember from the youth team,
where you gave me
the captain's armband in Sweden,
with players from the youngest age
groups, '83 and '84.
Back then, Iniesta was just starting to
play for Barcelona,
and on one of the first training
sessions, you said to me:
"You're on the same level
as Iniesta, you're that level.
He plays for Barcelona, but you can
get there." -He is a Spaniard.
Imagine what was going through my mind
then, and how I felt toward you,
and how much I would do
for you on the pitch.
That's what carried us, especially the
younger ones, through those years,
but also the older ones. We had a great
blend and balance with Robi, Kovač,
Srna, who was already one of the older
players, Joe Šimunić, Dario Šimić,
and others like Niko Kovač.
We really had an incredible
atmosphere and balance.
Yes, it was great.
So, you signed for Tottenham before the
Euro, right? -Yes, before the Euro.
But did it bother you?
Were you upset that you had to stay
another year at Dinamo,
since out of the three of you,
Čarli and Dudu had gone to
Arsenal and City a year earlier,
and you had to stay?
-Yes, they left that season.
It didn't bother me because
I wanted to stay at Dinamo,
but I was disappointed...
-... because they left?
I was disappointed,
but no matter that they left,
I still wanted to stay
because I thought I could
achieve something with Dinamo in Europe.
Dinamo had that ambition, at least
that's how it was presented to us.
But then, the first offer came,
Čarli went abroad, my best friend.
So now I'm without one friend.
Dudu left too.
And then you start thinking about why
when we're talking about
wanting to do something big,
and now your key players are leaving.
Despite that, I still wanted to stay
because I was enjoying my time at
Dinamo. It was really nice there,
but then came the halfway point,
Vukojević was sold, if I'm not mistaken,
and then someone else was sold. And then
you think, 'What am I doing here?'
and I wanted to leave. That's when I got
a little upset and had a small conflict,
not a major one, but I was angry at
the club because I wanted to leave.
Then Chelsea appeared, and when
the club didn't want to let me go,
Tottenham came in June,
and I immediately knew,
when that option appeared, knowing
the club well and said, 'I'm going.'
That was it.
And now, you and Vanja
go to London, a huge city.
The club is part of the big five, right?
The league is what it is.
It's a big transfer, right?
You're already the guy for the job,
and it helps with the English the most
when you've already beat them once.
We were in the qualifiers, came through,
and the start was tricky.
It doesn't help that we're in the group
with the English again, and we lost 4-1.
The coach is Ramos, and some small
stories start about your fitness,
justifying why you didn't go to
Newcastle, Manchester, and others,
but rather to Tottenham. The issue
of physical fitness was created,
that's the smaller struggle
that doesn’t last long.
Then a good thing happens again,
Harry Redknapp comes as coach.
Yes. At Tottenham it didn’t start well.
First of all, preseason ruined me.
Why? -Because it was one of
the hardest preseasons of my life.
Maybe the reason was that after
the Euro, after that trauma,
I didn’t want to hear about football.
In that one free month,
I did nothing. Normally I go crazy
when I’m not doing anything.
I have to. Either I play basketball
or I play tennis. That month
I did nothing. I’d had enough
of football after the loss to Turkey.
That was a trauma. Then I came
there, preseason, running,
three trainings a day. At 7:30
in the morning on golf fields
in Valencia. We run, Zokora,
Gilberto, the Brazilian and me.
Zokora a kilometre ahead of me.
He can run for three days.
Then at 10:30 training on the beach,
and football in the evening.
Legs like wood,
you can’t do anything.
I had a small knee injury there
and the season didn’t start well.
We lost the first few matches,
I think we had just one point.
After, if I'm not mistaken,
a few rounds, Harry Redknapp
comes as coach. We play at home
against Bolton, and since he
arrived the night before,
he wasn’t supposed to be on the bench.
But he, as an old fox, sits
on the bench… -Bolton? -Yes.
He sets the team and we play great.
We win 2-0. That’s when it started.
I think we played the most
beautiful football then.
We beat Liverpool at home.
That famous 4-4 at Emirates,
right after that. We really played
amazing football with Harry.
He loved Croatians and he really
was perfect for the team we had.
A real expert, a cool guy,
he understands football.
The type of English coach who says
what needs to be said, watches training.
He coached less, but
stepped in when necessary.
He gives you exact instructions
on what to do on the pitch.
He was ideal for us. -He loved
Croatians? -He did. He always
spoke nicely about you,
about Štimac. -At one point
there were four of you.
-They called us Cro Tottenham.
Plete, Niko, Čarli and me. Four.
-He’s a coach people often underrate,
and he coached me at West Ham.
He adopted that "biggest enemy" thing.
It’s not that he brags about it,
but he’s a coach who likes to put
as many good players as possible
on the pitch. -Yes. -He isn’t afraid
to play you, Niko, this one,
that one. -He has no problem.
He plays the ones who love to play.
-He really understands football.
I think it’s unbelievable that
he never coached England.
I think he would’ve been ideal
for that generation…
The one they had back then.
-That would’ve been the ideal coach,
but why it didn’t happen…
-Those are things outside football.
Then Tottenham, always Tottenham,
right, goes to the Champions League.
That match with City…
-After 60+ years.
In the Champions League they play
great, all of it. Milan and Real, right?
Yes. -We lost to Real
in the quarterfinals.
And then you only grow and grow.
That stigma disappears, you get
big praise from Alex Ferguson
and others… I forgot our talk,
but I remembered it the other day.
Chelsea calls, and you’re close
to leaving, 2011…
-2011. -To Chelsea.
That says a lot about your
character. You forgot it,
and so did I, and only later I remembered.
We played a match in Dublin.
Friendly match.
-Against Ireland, yes.
The one in August,
when the transfer window is open,
and the league had already started.
You said you wanted to talk to me.
What is it about? Chelsea.
You said you wanted to go to Chelsea.
Said it publicly. -You saw it as your
big step forward. Is that right? -Yes.
But you were a Tottenham player.
We know that Tottenham
is very difficult to negotiate with,
especially with English clubs.
You played some sort of warm-up match,
Tottenham against some team,
and you played very well.
You even celebrated the goal you scored.
Then you tell me: "Boss,
they called me from Chelsea...",
I won’t say who, because it doesn’t matter,
"... and they said that a player who wants
to leave the club doesn’t behave like that."
I said, "Alright Luka,
but tell them that you are Luka Modrić,
and if they want to buy you,
then they should buy you",
and not expect you to punch the coach
in the head just because you want to go.
Nowadays it’s considered normal
not to show up for pre-season, etc.,
and you want to go to Chelsea,
because Chelsea was top at that time.
But you won’t do things
that shouldn’t be done. -Yes.
I said that publicly,
but maybe I shouldn’t have,
because I was happy at Tottenham,
and my relationship with the club
and the fans was phenomenal.
But at one moment I felt
that I had reached a certain level
and that I wanted to take a step forward
so I could progress further in my career.
But simply, Tottenham was firm.
The club president was very strict
already in the first meeting.
During the conversation
he made it clear
that there was no chance
he would let me go.
After that, I continued to behave normally,
as if nothing was happening,
because I knew it would be difficult.
Both clubs are from London,
there’s also the rivalry...
I wanted it, even though I knew
it would be very difficult.
In the end it didn’t happen,
and I continued to play
as if nothing had happened. I played
maybe one of my best seasons that year.
We finished in fourth place,
but Chelsea won
the Champions League that year.
Because it wasn’t like today,
where if you finish fourth
you go through no matter what.
You go to the Champions League, yes.
-Chelsea was in fifth place,
but since they won, they qualified
for the Champions League,
and Tottenham didn’t. So the season
was phenomenal, and then a year later...
In the end it turned out
that it was better that way.
Probably, if you had gone to Chelsea...
There would be no Real Madrid move.
At least not for another year.
-Certainly not. So it turned out perfectly.
Chelsea doesn’t sell players that easily.
-That’s something I always keep in mind.
Who knows why something
is good when it doesn’t happen.
And in the end it turned out
why it was good. -Yes.
Before that we had another
competition with the national team,
in which we didn’t qualify.
That was in 2010, right?
And then in 2012 we went to the EURO.
It was the same situation as in 2008.
Only now in the same group were
the Italians, the Irish, and the Spanish,
with Iniesta, Xavi, and Pirlo there as well,
but by then you already knew in your mind
that you were of that level, only you
were Croatian, and they were Spanish.
You know that I have great confidence
in myself, my qualities, abilities, etc.,
but when you play against such teams
you have to know everything about yourself,
and you have to play
against such players and show
whether you are actually at that
level or not. And we played excellent,
but we were in a group
that ended being finals.
And we could have beaten
either of them, for example.
We have we played excellent against them.
Unfortunately, it didn’t go our way
and we were eliminated
in the group stage.
But we played good football,
very good.
That was the match against Spain
where, as we later found out,
Mourinho finally came to watch you.
And you played brilliantly.
It was a phenomenal match.
That one and the one against Turkey,
those are two matches we lost, so they’re
not talked about as top performances.
But we talked about it you played
excellently in both matches.
Against Turkey you set up Oli
for that chance over the crossbar
and then you score. -Krasnić, yes.
And the one against Spain was great.
And then you go to Real? -Yes.
Is it true that president Levy
promised you, a year ago,
that if Real called you,
you would go, or isn't that so?
It's true that he promised me.
When Chelsea didn't happen,
he promised me half the season.
I insisted on moving on, because
Chelsea wanted me for next year,
and I said I wanted to go.
We had negotiations to extend
and sign a new contract.
However, at one point,
I don't know why,
he told me that the only club he
would let me go to was Real Madrid.
No matter how much you
believe in yourself,
Real Madrid sounds unattainable.
You think it's too far for you.
Real is special. I spent 13 years there
and I know what I'm talking about.
I tell him that I want it too,
but I might not be able to go to Real.
He kept repeating that it was
the only club he'd let me go to.
I tell him: "Okay, fine".
We had a conversation after that,
and Vanja was there.
He repeated it again,
and I say: "OK!"
Then came the Euro and
the preparations. We were in Rovinj.
But even before going to Rovinj,
they called me to tell me
that Real wanted me.
I was delighted!
The contact started in May,
towards the end of the season.
Or we were on vacation, preparing.
I knew Real was interested.
I also talked to the coach.
However, going there was not easy.
Regardless of what he allowed me,
the negotiations were difficult and long.
You probably know how I
behaved at that moment.
It wasn't difficult to take that step.
But it was difficult for me.
However, I had a promise,
that was in my head.
If someone gives me a promise,
a hand shake, I expect them to keep it.
I understand negotiations and agreements,
but, really, it was difficult and long.
And then I decided to take that step.
I was ready at that moment
not to play anymore.
What you didn't want to do a year ago,
because you felt it would be too much,
then you felt betrayed, because, after all,
that's what you were promised.
That's right. -The club chairman
promised you that.
It was difficult for me
because of my relationship
and history with Tottenham
and the fans.
It's not me, it's not my character,
but I didn't see any other solution.
And that's it. -It's your character.
You did the same thing twice.
Leaving Dinamo, you're going last?
-Yes. -Instead of first.
It's the same here. I gave you everything,
but don't tease me anymore.
That's true. -You gave everything,
and too much.
Everything has its limits.
-And now it's enough! -That's right.
And you're coming to Real.
Where do you see your advantage?
Where do you see that you have what
this other opponent doesn't have?
The ones who put me as the last
midfielder were you and Harry Redknapp.
We didn't talk to Mandža in those
years the way we used to.
I told her that we would play
a phenomenal World Cup.
We'll do the best,
and I'll be the best. -No!
Huge moment of your national team
career was the match against Denmark.
Just like that... Blow, blow.
That is impossible.